# 10. NATS

Date: 2026-07-08

## Status

Accepted

## Context

Currently, Bob uses the follwoing as its backbone:

- RabbitMQ: to coordinate the runs and cluster comms across the nodes.
- etcd: to store the cluster state in a simple, versioned manner.

Both of them have served and continues to serve their purpose well, spccially when it comes to keeping the architecture decoupled and performant.

They however come with these tradeoffs:

- RabbitMQ is inherently a sizeable thing to run specially for prod work loads having its own maintenance overhead.
- Bob uses a small fraction of its features and the lib code needed to support that isn't worth the maintainence, specially wlike the official Clojure lib not supporting ever feature.
- Nothing really is wrong with etcd, its lighter weight that RabbitMQ but is another "moving part" in Bob.
- Thre is no nice etcd client for Clojure, thereby making a simple KV requirement need a lot of Java deps.

## Decision

[NATS](https://nats.io/) is to be used to form the backbone for Bob going forward for the following reasons:

- Its a single thing that can serve both the purposes of a worker queue as well as a a KV store.
- Very minimal deployment, simpler architecture and part of CNCF; designed for cloud native workloads.
- The tradeoff here is that some assembly is required and possible perf reductions but worth the effort in terms of flexibility and maintenance.
- [claxon](https://github.com/lispyclouds/claxon) is available as an idiomatic Clojure client and would serve this well.

## Consequences

The following are to happen in order:

- etcd will be removed, replaced by NATS powered by claxon.
- RabbitMQ will be removed, all queueing code to use NATS JetStream.
- Ideally its all an internal change, so API remains stable.
- Infra becomes simpler.
